# Recommended contexts for cider

Cider has many applications. Public sector agencies can use their poverty estimations to target and deliver services and aid to those in need. It can also be a low-cost way to predict poverty as part of a statistical office’s exercise to measure population economic well-being. 

While the latest academic research from [Aiken et al. (2021)](https://www.nber.org/papers/w29070) on the performance of this approach is promising, the study shows that alternative poverty estimation methods can outperform the technique demonstrated by Cider. As such, Cider's poverty estimates should always be compared against alternative policy options for predicting poverty. Cider makes this more accessible through a module that provides these comparisons across several vital dimensions: accuracy, bias, and representation. Cider is valuable when it outperforms alternative approaches, whether on the metrics produced by the comparison module or on alternative metrics important to the policymaker. Cider is also beneficial when it can be used in conjunction with complementary approaches to poverty estimation. Such complementary approaches are especially important when cell phone or SIM card penetration is lacking.

Because Cider works on satellite and telecom data, it has two significant strengths: it can identify and reach people rapidly (speed) and do so on the order of millions of people (scale). Therefore, emergencies such as large-scale shocks like famines and flooding that require speed and scale may be the most natural use cases for Cider. This concurs with the research from Aiken et al. (2021) that states, “These results highlight the potential for new data sources to contribute to humanitarian response efforts, particularly in crisis settings when traditional data are missing or out of date.” 

Ultimately, whether in crisis situations or operating in a “data desert”, we recommend that decision-makers compare this approach to other available options and potentially find complementary solutions for performance gaps. Some potential complementary solutions are discussed [by GiveDirectly](https://medium.com/center-for-effective-global-action/how-precision-aid-and-machine-learning-based-targeting-can-complement-existing-social-protection-de3bc3211fd2).

